Hello, Rebecca and Carl.
Welcome to all of you type loving Pythonistas.
Awesome to have you here on the show.
Thanks for being here.
We're going to talk Python typing,
especially from the perspective of the Python typing council,
which honestly, I am a huge fan of Python typing.
It's still something I learned about not too long ago.
So I'm going to be learning along with everyone else what it is you all do and so on.
So I'm really excited to be diving into this.
I think since types came to Python, I think it's made it a little bit more rigorous.
You know, for all those people out there like, oh, it's not a real language without any form of static typing.
We can't use it on real projects.
I don't know how true that was, but certainly it's less true now.
You know, you can pick per project.
So it's super cool.
Before we get into all that, though, let's just go around for a quick introductions.
Jala, welcome to the show. Awesome to have you here.
Hi, yeah. I'm Jala. I've been on the Python typing council since the beginning.
I helped set it up a couple years ago. Outside of my typing work, I currently work at OpenAI,
where I work on developer productivity, which means things like running CI for people
and generally helping people be productive.
I've been working with Python for more than a decade.
I started out because my previous job was mostly in Python
and then got more and more involved with the language.
Awesome.
So let me get this right.
At OpenAI, you're basically helping developers there
have better developer tooling and common packages
and workflows and stuff like that.
That's right.
Yeah.
Yeah, mostly around things that happen in CI, like running tests efficiently, figuring
out the right tests to run, getting the right CI workers up.
Yeah, that sounds very exciting.
Right in the epicenter of all the big tech stuff these days.
Super cool.
Rebecca, hello, welcome.
Hey, thanks for having me.
I'm Rebecca.
I've been on the typing council also for about three years, I think,
since the, less than three, since the beginning.
But my day job, I work at Meta on Python typing,
gone Pyrefly, which is a new type checker and language server
written in Rust, still in beta.
Prior to that, I was at Google for eight years,
also on the Python team.
I just, I really like Python.
Awesome.
Yeah, super neat. I'm a big fan of both Pyrefly and ty, which will both have representatives here,
I know. And I think it's just a super exciting time for Python types. And certainly that's one
of the reasons. So very cool. Carl, welcome back. Thank you. Great to be here. Yeah, Carl Meyer.
I currently work at Astral, where I work on ty, which is a Python type checker and language server
written in Rust, also in beta. And yeah, I guess how did I get into typing? Or I've been on the
typing council not since the beginning. I think it's been a year and a half.
And yeah, I got into Python typing at the time in 2016, 2017. I was working at Instagram and
That was in the very early days of Python typing.
The PEP484, PEP483, the early Python typing peps had recently come out within the last couple of years.
And one of the co-authors of some of those peps, Lukash Lange, was actually sitting at a desk right next to me at the time.
And at some point we started to think that we should try this Python typing stuff on the Instagram server monolith.
And so I took that on as a side project, and then it eventually became the main project, and then it took like three years.
So a lot of Python typing experience there.
Wow, there absolutely is.
You know, I think a couple of things I'd like to touch on there.
First of all, Instagram, is it maybe the biggest Django deployment in the world?
It's certainly one of the bigger ones, right?
And I think a lot of people don't necessarily know that a core chunk of Instagram is actually Python, right?
i don't i mean i don't know if we have any way to know how big uh the django to plant in the
wild might be but it's certainly a big one yeah it's definitely a big one there was some talks
about um dismissing the garbage collector from the instagram folks uh that wasn't you giving the talk
but at pycon so that was pretty interesting but i think actually that work that you're talking
about, especially with Lukash, really kind of opened a lot of people's eyes about Python typing.
He gave a couple of PyCon talks, showed real metrics of how much of the code base is typed,
how much it's changed, like error detection, that kind of stuff. So let me ask you,
do you feel like it would be different? Would it have gone different now if tools like ty and
Pyrefly exists existed back then is Python typing different now than it was then
uh certainly yes I mean there's been the type system has gotten
more complex over time so it is both more expressive and more complex
and yeah we have more more type checkers available now now
Hold on.
I think for some reason my audio just cut out.
Can you all still hear me?
I can hear you.
Okay, yeah, it came back.
I don't know.
These AirPods.
You know how AirPods switch?
I got a text which made a noise on my iPad and I think my sound switched to my iPad.
Anyway, sorry about that.
I do agree that it's more complicated and I don't know how to feel about that.
It is more expressive, but I feel like it's starting to get, I mean, we're not at C++
ATL like templates of templates of templates, but still, it's getting more serious.
But I guess one of the really nice parts is that you can just take as much as you want of the complexity and you can just leave the rest, right?
That's part of the magic of Python typing is that it's a gradual typing system, right?
That's a choice people get to make.
It can be none.
It can be quite a bit and anywhere in between.
So I guess that's probably one of the decisions.
Let's talk about the typing council.
So when did the typing council come along?
And did the typing council exist to create all these peps and make this happen?
Or was it afterwards?
What's the history of the typing council and its purpose, folks?
Yeah, it postdates most of the peps.
So initially, the type system was created just through the regular  PEP process,
which means that something gets submitted.
At first, still to Guido as the BDFL.
later the steering council.
But that meant that it's very hard to make changes to like this specification.
Like anytime we want to make change something about how the type systems would work,
we had to go through this PEP procedure,
talk to the steering council who are very busy people
who deal with a lot of other aspects of the language other than typing.
So, Shantanu and I came up with this idea of creating a separate council
to specifically in charge of typing
that would be in a specification
where we can make small changes ourselves
without having to go through this whole PEP process.
And this way, when all the type checkers agree
that something needs to go a certain way
and it's not exactly what's in the PEPs,
we can change it and have a place to record that
and people can refer to it
and new type checkers can also try to follow those decisions.
Very interesting.
I didn't realize that it was sort of,
was there to allow for small changes to be made to make that much easier.
But of course that makes sense because the PEP process is,
it's pretty serious and drawn out.
And we've seen even small language changes have quite passionate folks,
I guess we should say.
So yeah, yeah, very nice.
Do you have any examples of the types of changes that you all have that have happened over the years that maybe were typing council only?
One was the specification for how overloads work, which is perhaps not really a small change.
But one of the most complicated features in the type system really is the overloads, where you can give multiple signatures for a function.
and type checkers sort of select which one to use
based on the arguments when the function is called.
And when it was initially created,
I, from what I recall,
there just wasn't really a specification.
It's just like you use the signatures
in a way that makes sense.
And Eric Trout, who's currently on the council
came up with a pretty specific procedure
for exactly how overload should work
to make it so that type checkers have,
both sort of users can understand how it works
type checkers can have something to work towards to make sure that they will implement overloads
in the same way. Yeah. Maybe a smaller example that is an example of something that would have been
too small for a  PEP and hard to accomplish before the typing council existed. And this
is actually a change that I pushed through before I was on the typing council, but the typing
council approved it, was a clarification around the interpretation of data class fields. If a final
annotation is applied to a data class field, does that mean, so if you apply a final annotation to
a regular class attribute, since it can't be changed, that implies that it's a class variable.
And there was a question of if that should be the interpretation with the data class or not.
So we discussed that and made a clarification to the spec. Okay, interesting. I've never really
thought about final being applied to a class field,
but I've always used them sort of just for constants.
But maybe people out there don't know,
like typing dot final bracket type, right?
That's kind of the way you can do constants in Python, right?
Constant for the type checker.
Nothing in the runtime will stop you from editing it.
But--
Not there.
I have some examples coming up, and I'm
interested to hear your thoughts on them.
But for sure, there is this tension, right?
I think that's probably worth touching on as well
is this is a tension for Python in general
is you can write all the types you want.
And then when you run your code, it just doesn't care.
There's a few instances, Pydantic, FastAPI, a few others.
But generally speaking, it's there
for the editors and the type checkers and the linters.
and not for runtime, right?
- Yeah, that's right.
There's many exceptions to that.
There's a product like mypyC,
which comes with mypy that's used those types
to compile your code into more efficient machine codes.
Maybe there's gonna be more products like that
in the future, I don't know.
But yes, in general, it's separate from the runtime.
Sort of a similar model to TypeScript
where TypeScript gets compiled into JavaScript
and types just go away.
Here we don't do a compilation step,
but still the same idea of the types,
just not influencing the runtime.
- Although we do make them available for introspection
via the annotations attributes,
which is what has enabled the projects like Pydantic
and other sort of runtime checkers
to make use of type annotations at runtime also.
- Yeah, I don't know if the typing council
was around for this,
but there was a proposal,
I don't remember the exact details, but something to the effect of for type checking, not actually
doing some of the full imports or something along those lines, right?
Where the runtime behavior would have made it hard for tools like Pydantic and others
to get that.
And there was some kind of compromise, right?
I don't remember the details.
Anyone does?
Future import?
Yes, I think so.
Yeah, it's like 563 and 649 or something.
And 749.
Yeah, what happened was that there was going to be a change. That's what the from future
import annotations import does. It changes all annotations into raw strings. So the default
behavior before recently was that annotations are regular codes. If you write devf return
to ints and you import the module, it just looks up the name ints and puts that in annotations
dictionary, which makes introspection easy, but it's made, it has some costs on performance
because memory usage sometimes is high and also made things harder to use sometimes because
if you use a name that's not defined yet at runtime, you get an error. That often comes
up if you have like a class that has a reference in an annotation to the class itself or circular
dependency classes right the circular imports because you want to say this
glass is created by that thing and it returns one but you know somehow you've
got to import the other one and that's such a hassle yeah it's yeah even out in
the audience we have circular imports oh yeah for sure what about lazy imports
That just recently got accepted and will be in 3.15,
which I'm super excited about
because I think it'll make app startup a lot faster
for many use cases.
But does that have knock-on effects for typing?
Not that directly,
because I think for a type checker,
lazy imports mostly just look like regular imports.
I guess I should maybe leave that to the people
who are actually working on type checkers
that are being written right now.
yeah yeah rebecca do you see this making any difference for you lazy imports yeah uh
to be honest it's not something we've uh looked at too carefully yet 315 it seems a little
fine in the future but i don't think it's likely to make a huge difference
Karl?
Yeah, I've thought about it briefly, and I think that it, I think the type checkers really won't need to care.
Maybe there will be some edge cases that will come up that I haven't thought of, but it shouldn't be a big deal.
Yeah, that's what I thought as well.
the one variation that I can certainly see is if you have a type if you have something specified
in a type like say for a field of a class or a pydantic model or something that would otherwise
not trigger the lazy import to become imported would potentially having types specify
cause more importing to happen sooner in the runtime yeah there's actually an issue related
But I think we may need to resolve before 3.15, but I don't know how yet.
In data classes, if you have, if you use a type in a data class annotation that's lazily
imported, actually creating a data class will delay the import.
It will try to resolve the import and actually make it not lazy.
This is because data classes doesn't really need to look at all of the annotations in
year class but it looks at them enough to trigger reification of the imports.
I shared this with some of the people on the lazy imports team but we haven't yet come up
with a good way around it.
I think this might end up being a bit of a food gun so I feel like we should ideally
find a workaround but I don't know what it would be yet.
Yeah, I don't know that it's wrong that it converts it to an eager import which it needs
to know what it is potentially, right?
It actually doesn't. Data classes just need to know whether it's a classifier or not.
I think that's pretty much all. I guess there's an initifier also, but it doesn't really need to
know anything else. In theory, it should be possible to just say, hey, this is not classifier,
so don't bother importing it. Interesting. That's for data classes,
but say if I specify a parameter type on a function. Yeah, then it should be fine. I guess,
again unless something is uh if it does annotations so if you have something like a decorator that
looks at annotations in your function it might reify those imports okay interesting there is one
other potentially interesting thing for type checkers it's already uh difficult for type
checkers to figure out when uh like a sub module should be considered to be an attribute of the
anywhere will attach that submodule as an attribute on the parent module. But at runtime,
that could literally happen anywhere. It could happen in totally unrelated code outside of the
module, and a type checker probably won't be able to see that. So type checkers already have sort
of complex sets of rules around where they look for these submodule imports and when they consider
a submodule import to be reliably happening enough that the type checker should consider
this submodule to exist as an attribute. And lazy imports may make that even... We'll add one more
wrinkle to those bits of heuristics in that we'll have to decide if you have a lazy import of a
submodule and you're under init.py, it's lazy. So should the type checker consider that submodule to
be imported or not be imported? I think it'll be another case where there's no clear right answer
and we'll just have to make a decision one way or the other.
Right.
Yeah, there's some variations across type checkers,
which we'll get to later.
I think, though, before we move off this,
there's actually off introducing the typing council.
I think we should point out that there's two other folks
who couldn't be here who are also on the typing council,
Eric Trout and Yuka Letosilo.
Sorry, Yuka.
But I want to make sure that we point out there's actually five people, not just the three of you, right?
How do you get on the council?
Is there an election?
Do you just apply?
Vacancies are filled by the members themselves.
So when somebody declares the intention to leave the council, we basically ask for people who are interested and then make a selection.
Generally, we try to get people who have experience in the type system.
We try to get a good cross-representation of people working on different type checkers.
So we have Carl and Rebecca here who work on two type checkers, ty and Pyrefly.
Yuka works on mypy.
Eric Chart works on Pyrites, which are two of the most widely used type checkers.
Yeah, so we try to get wider representation of people working on those parts of the ecosystem.
Yeah, that's really cool about it.
you know, it's got a bias towards finding people actually doing the work.
So let's talk about the specification project at typing.python.org.
What is, what is this here?
I mean, I can.
Yeah, go for it.
Talk a bit about, I guess it's a specification for how the type system
used to work. The way it started was that, Yala, you basically took all the typing peps and like
stapled them together, right, to make like one long doc. And since then, we've been iterating on it,
filling in parts that were missing, like overload evaluation and making other changes as well.
Yeah, it's tricky, right? Because traditionally, the typing system is kind of defined across a
series of peps, right?
And so what is the document that tells you how it works, right?
Yeah, that is hard because often those peps build on top of each other.
So then in the extreme, you might see like one thing in one  PEP and then another  PEP that
adds an aspect of it, another one that adds another aspect.
And overall it makes it very hard to follow.
One of the things I did recently was rewrite the typed dict spec.
dict is a feature of the python type system that has been added to a lot from one  PEP to another
and i ended up rewriting the whole thing to basically put all those features together in
a coherent whole rather than just having them all copy pasted one after the other
very nice okay so if somebody really wants a good understanding of the python type system
They go to typing.python.org.
You know, one thing I think maybe is worth touching on,
it's just kind of out of the blue a bit,
but I think it's a really interesting aspect
of the Python typing system is the,
what is it called, the numerical tower or the number tower,
where it's like, if I have a number,
I could specify it as an int,
or I could specify it as a float,
and those kinds of things.
But do you really need to say it's a int pipe float
or a union of int and float if it could be either, right?
And what is it called?
It's the numerical tower, right?
There are many different-- yeah, there
are different towers too.
In Python, there's also this thing called a numbers module
that you have there.
That's just basically ignored by the type system.
I think it's--
I don't know.
It's been useful for some people.
I feel like in general that module just hasn't worked out very well as being very useful.
Yeah, I think the item, for some reason I'm failing to find this in real time.
But I think the interesting aspect is that you can say it's a float,
and that's basically equivalent to union of integer and float and so on, right?
I think the typing numbers in Python is pretty interesting.
I think every type checker has a different interpretation of what a float annotation actually means.
Oh, really?
It's an area of some lack of clarity in the spec.
Yeah, and a lot of contentiousness.
If we could go back in time, I would...
Knowing what I know now, I'd probably advocate for things being done differently.
because like beginning, you know, like there were multiple things like with similar flavor,
like there was also one where you could put, give some, give a parameter a non-none annotation
and default it to none for convenience.
And we've largely like moved away from stuff like that in favor of explicitness.
Yeah, what the current spec says is that basically if you have a function that takes a float,
you're also allowed to pass an int.
But that's not really enough.
It doesn't tell you how these things work in all cases.
And we've had some attempts to try to come up with a way
to specify that special case in a way that makes more sense,
at least makes more sense to me.
It's been very contentious.
People have very strong opinions about this.
Yeah.
It is a little weird, isn't it?
It's quite weird.
I guess non-obvious is what I'd like to say, really,
honestly. So I'd like to get the official counsel's thoughts on this. When, when is too much,
when is typing too much typing, right? I made the joke about C++ ATL. If you've ever worked with
that, it's like a parameter, you know, a template class where templated classes are part of the
concrete type of the template. Like it's just off the hook. There's certainly places where
typing can be too much. And a lot of the purity of Python or the readability of Python is the fact
that it's got so few symbols. And so adding types adds context, but it also takes away,
you know, makes it a little harder to read. When is too much typing? When do you recommend typing?
You know, maybe Rebecca, I'll let you go first, but like, what are your thoughts in the sort of,
How much typing should I use in Python?
I'll give you what is sort of my official stance,
which is that if you want your type checker to work well,
you should type annotate your API boundaries.
So like parameters and returns in public functions,
public class attributes, things like that.
And like even things that seem trivial,
like, oh, this function returns none,
better to annotate it because you know someone else might be depending on your library and
consuming that type of information. I will say personally what I tend to do is like I annotate
things that I think are non-trivial because I want to see that as documentation and if something
like you know a function that does return none to be honest I will probably forget to annotate it
half the time because i'll be like i honestly don't need to see it so
yeah you know one of the interesting features of the pyrefly vs code extension that's the only one
i can speak of at the moment and carl you've got to tell me if the ty one does this as well
is it will sort of overlay its belief of what types are like if there's you say x equals a
a function return value and it knows what the function returns,
it'll have a gray like colon int if it returned an int or something.
So you can read the code and see what the types are
without actually putting it into the text of the code.
It's only within the editor.
Does ty do something like that, Carl?
Yes, we also have inlay type ints.
Yeah, inlay type ints.
That's what it's called.
So yeah, I don't know.
That also brings an interesting challenge-- not a challenge,
like a wrinkle to the recommendation of,
should I put types on like the return value
because I want to know that's a list of user,
not a list of user IDs or whatever, for example,
like a list of UUID.
But if it's going to show up anyway in the editor,
maybe I don't have to write that, right?
And so that becomes sort of somewhere
where you could debate again, I think.
However, I do 100% agree with you, Rebecca,
that put it on your API boundaries.
If this is the place that people get into some part of your code
and they don't know or want to know about the inside of it,
having types there is really helpful both for editors,
for type checkers, and just for reading code,
and even for AI, which is a crazy world.
Yeah.
Carl, what are your thoughts here?
How much typing is too much typing?
What's the guidelines here?
I think I agree with Rebecca's answer.
I mean, that one place you definitely want to have explicit type annotations is that API boundaries, public API of a library, et cetera.
In terms of what's too much typing, I mean, there's certainly patterns that have historically been used in Python that we still can't express well in the type system or that require extremely complex type annotations to express well.
And I think there it becomes a judgment call.
If it's like a core widely used API,
you may get a lot of benefit
from some very complex and verbose annotations.
And so then it's worth sort of going through that pain
and the pain of adding them and of reading them
in order to get that additional typing coverage
everywhere you use that API.
If it's much less frequently used code
that's highly dynamic, maybe it's not worth it in that case.
I think there's a lot of judgment calls here.
What about one-off scripts?
I'm going to write this thing to just move this data from here to there.
Once it's moved, I don't need it again.
We're done with that old system.
We're going to the new one.
Maybe less typing.
Yeah, I think that's what's useful for you.
Often I feel like one-off scripts are not really one-off.
Maybe you want to move some similar data later,
And then it's useful if you can understand your code again,
if you want to read what you did.
You thought you didn't need it again.
And all of a sudden, at six months old,
you don't understand it.
And the types would help a lot, right?
Yeah.
Jelal, what's your advice?
Yeah, I think what Kar and Rebecca said
makes sense to me too.
I think types have advantages in terms of documenting human
readers, what is going on, and in terms of catching mistakes
that otherwise would not be called until runtime, perhaps.
They have costs in maybe making your code harder to reach
if there's too much going on.
So add types as long as those benefits outweigh the costs.
Yeah.
I mean, do you recommend to anyone that they just 100% go full
like C++, C# on it and just type it every single thing?
Is there an advantage for static type checkers,
like mypy type stuff you can run across and get that.
I mean, you could do that with PowerFly or ty and the CLI
as well.
But thinking more mypy is like kind of being real strict
on some of that stuff.
Personally, I do tend to annotate almost all function
parameters and if class attributes, if I make a class.
Sometimes it's not as necessary.
Like you don't need to annotate your tests, perhaps,
or you don't need to annotate internal functions as much.
But for my own coding, I usually find it helpful to do that.
But sometimes I see people annotating even local variables
where it's very obvious to type check what the type is,
and they can just infer it reliably.
And then it really just adds noise,
and you shouldn't do it.
Yeah, exactly.
If you've got a function that's annotated with a return value,
and you say x equals the function call,
then the type checkers can infer that.
And you're just causing extra noise, I guess.
So suppose you all want to change something.
What's the process of actually going through and making some changes?
Yeah, there's mostly sort of two levels of this.
Well, maybe there's even three levels.
The first one is if it's something that's so small that's just like a wording clarification or something,
We just make a PR to the repo and a few of us look at it and we change it.
The second level is when it's sort of a smaller change that doesn't really introduce a new
feature and then we make a PR to the typing spec repo and we formally have all of us sign
off on it.
That's what happens like with what Carl mentioned earlier of the final change in data classes.
Nice.
I just had to merge this one.
I love it.
Yeah, I guess this repo itself doesn't have anything.
It's the Python typing repo where the decisions are made.
The typing council just has some documentation.
Maybe this one.
Yeah.
And then the third level is peps.
Like really big new changes.
You can still write a pep.
And then we make a recommendation in the steering code so it makes a decision eventually.
Okay.
So if I wanted to suggest something, I could come up here and I could open up an issue,
maybe start a conversation on typing, Python/typing.
And you can make a pull request to change the spec.
Okay.
and so the pull request would not be to change the code like how python maybe interprets code that
has this new thing but to suggest that the spec has it which then would start a process that
ultimately might make c python understand it right well c python itself probably doesn't do anything
with it um i guess most of the things that go directly here are changes to how to interpret
the things that are already in CPython.
If it's adding something new, it will usually
need to go through a path, except if it's something very small.
Yeah, I guess maybe let's talk about that for a minute.
We got two representatives here of the newer breed of tools.
What's the story for inconsistencies
across interpretations of the spec?
I know that there's slight variations.
I've also, you know, not putting either of you on the spotlight,
but like using, say, PyCharm and like writing code.
So it's type checkers happy and then using something like Pyright.
And so it has a real different interpretation of what you should let slide
and what you shouldn't.
I feel like Pyright is much more focused on like enforcing the nullability
or the lack thereof, and it warns of inconsistencies there
where PyCharm doesn't seem to care as much.
I don't know which one I like better, but I know they're different.
And if I write code in one, then I open the other.
I'm like, huh, why is it upset?
It seemed like it was fine.
How do you all navigate this?
Yeah.
I think one thing useful to say about the spec there
is that the spec covers a lot of things.
In particular, it tends to cover sort of the details
of more advanced type system features.
but there's a lot of very fundamental stuff about how a type checker works in terms of
how it does inference and how it does type narrowing. And even in some cases, like you
mentioned, what it chooses to emit errors on that isn't really covered by the spec,
partly maybe because we haven't gotten to it and also partly intentionally in that there may be
room in some of those cases for different type checkers to work differently if they're serving
needs. Like if PyCharm is primarily concerned about being a useful kind of IDE and providing
go-to definition and that sort of thing, maybe emitting lots of warnings or errors and all kinds
of things where your code might be doing something wrong isn't as high a priority and another type
checker might have a different priority. One thing I want to mention is that it may not
seem like it, but things are already much better than they used to be. Like previously I worked
on different type checker called PyType. And at that time it was, you know, sort of the wild west.
Like we want to know how other type checkers like do something. Well, you know, like open up the mypy
playground, open up the PyRite playground, see what tells you. Now we at least have spec and
conformance tests. Yeah, that's really cool. How much would you say that your two type checkers
maybe bring in mypy as well? How much do they agree versus disagree? You only see the differences.
You don't see in which ways that they are the same as a consumer of them so much, right? You're
like, why is this one squiggly when it wasn't squiggly before? But how similar or different are
I don't know how we would quantify that there. I think there's a lot that is the same just because
it's based on how Python actually works. We're both trying to model the same language. And then
there's certainly also plenty of differences or things that we handle differently. So
quantify that. Yeah. I agree. It's hard to quantify, suppose, talk a bit abstractly about
various like type checkers philosophies like with Pyrefly,
you know, like we really try to do a lot of type inference.
So in that way in which, you know,
like we intentionally diverge a bit from myPy,
but like other than like that deliberate decision,
if we see ways in which we are like accidentally different,
you know, we do try to fix that because otherwise people
would have a hard time like running multiple type checkers
or migrating.
- Yeah, differences obviously cause pain for users
who are using multiple type checkers
or writing libraries that need to support
multiple type checkers.
So like Rebecca said, it's like,
if we are different from other type checkers,
we wanna be sure that there's a good reason
for that difference.
Oh, lost your audio, Michael.
- Right, sorry.
The difference should be because of philosophical choice,
not just you happen to have chosen slightly differently, right?
Yeah, and it's not just people who run different type checkers.
Like you pointed out, Carl, a lot of times it is if I have a library
and then different people want to consume that library,
then their type checker may or may not warn them
about how my library declares its types and so on.
I'll give you a real quick example.
I have a, I can't remember which one it was,
I have three or four different open source libraries that I've created that somehow work with creating,
basically passing data to templates in web apps.
So one is like, I want to use the Chameleon web template framework, but with FastAPI or with Flask.
And there's some other variations like partials and so on.
I can't remember which one, but it doesn't really matter.
One of them decorated a Flask.
I think it was a Flask, especially makes it irrelevant.
a flask endpoint and pyrite was really upset like the error message filled the entire page of how it
was inconsistent with what it expected for the definition of the flask view method i'm like
no one is going to call this like what does it even matter what this type is like it still runs
fine the runtime is fine you know it's no problem with this decorator it worked fine but something
about the way that the flask at get returned the type versus what my thing returned varied in like
a really slight way. I didn't care. But somebody was using some editor that used pyrite and they're
like, you have to help fix this. I can't take all these warnings that are huge and they're everywhere.
Like, okay, I'll go fix it. Right. And I went and I put a way more effort than was justified into a
function type that no one ever calls just to make the errors on some type checker I didn't use
go away, right? And that's the kind of thing where it becomes just a headache.
I don't know. I wish I remember. I probably got that written down in an issue somebody filed,
but it was a gnarly error. Or if you're working on an open source project, you know,
you can't make everybody use the same editor that wants to contribute on a big project.
And so you might run into this variation as well.
So there's a lot of cases.
Yeah, it can be really difficult to make these decisions
about what sorts of errors people want their type checker
to catch or what's too pedantic.
Because you want your type checker
to catch non-obvious errors, not just the obvious ones
that you probably would have seen by looking at the code
yourself.
But then there'll be cases where somebody says,
well, I don't care, that's too pedantic.
And it is difficult to make everyone happy.
- Yeah, exactly.
When I was seeing, I'm like, well,
who decides what the right signature
of a flask view and point should be like?
If the framework can call it, it should be okay.
There's not, just 'cause it had a decorator before,
that doesn't mean that's the official structure.
But anyway,
I do think one of the bigger philosophical differences
has to do around this concept of nullability.
Do you guys call it nullability or noneability?
Like, nullability comes from the other languages.
And by that, I mean I can specify that I have an integer.
And in the Python type system, it cannot be set to none,
even though in the runtime it can.
It has to be a concrete int type, unless you
make it a optional int or an int pipe none,
or one of those type things, right?
And how strong that gets enforced
seems to be one of the biggest difference of opinions
that I've seen around.
How do you all think about that?
- That's interesting to me that that's your experience
because my experience has been that that's actually an area
where everyone seems to agree as far as I can tell
that these are- - Interesting.
- Is an important source of bugs
and it's better to catch them.
So I think all of the type checkers,
Maybe you said PyCharm doesn't?
I don't think PyCharm does that.
I'm pretty sure it doesn't because I
agree that it's an important thing to check,
but it's also a point of a lot of friction.
And by that, I mean, let's suppose
I'm going to have a class that I need to create an instance of
and then put values into.
And I know once I put the values into it,
let's say it has a user ID.
I know for certain that that's going to be an integer.
So I'd like to say userid colon int because everywhere I use that object later,
if it's a function that takes an int and I specify it as optional int,
I will get a type check warning every single call site when I try to pass that.
But I know from the semantics of the behavior that it's going to always be an int
unless it's not initialized.
like in this short period where I want to create it.
So I can't set the type to int.
I have to set to optional int until I've loaded it.
But there's like this, I don't know,
that's the part where I see a lot of it show up
is inconsistencies and then warnings all over the place.
So I'm like, well, but that function is actually checking
if it's none and it'll return null, you know, none
or something like that.
So I don't know.
I totally agree with you.
It's just somewhere I've seen the most inconsistencies across maybe PyCharm versus others.
mypy also has a legacy mode for not checking none things called non-strict optional.
We are trying to get rid of that from mypy because strict optional,
like being strict about it is the more sensible thing to do.
Sure.
But it's possible that you've seen that too.
Yeah, I agree.
So what you mentioned is maybe sort of a special case of the case where you pass something to a class and there's initialization that changes the types.
Doesn't necessarily have to deal with none.
It could also just be like the attribute doesn't exist at the little beforehand or something.
Yeah.
We don't have a good solution for that.
Maybe there's room for something to support that use case better.
I don't know what it would look like.
Yeah, I don't know.
In some cases, there's ways you can, these things can sometimes nudge you towards a different design that is actually safer and will avoid errors.
Like in the kind of case you're talking about, you know, is it actually necessary that an uninitialized object and an initialized one are represented by the same type?
Or is there a way to adjust the API so that those are actually different types than you solve the problem and your code is safer?
So yeah, no, I totally hear you.
You know, I'm thinking like you submit a web form and before you,
before you parse it,
you've got to create the instance to set the values.
And I don't know, it's, it's not worth diving into,
but I do find this differentiation between like the strict enforcement of none
versus not none. I think it's powerful.
And I do think you all are right that it does catch a lot of errors. It's just,
It's just a difference, and it's just an interesting choice.
But I didn't get a concrete answer from the official counsel.
Nullable or noneable?
What is it?
I feel like you just don't really even talk about it
as a term, mostly.
None is special in the type system in how you represent it,
but it's not really special in other ways.
So you don't have a term for int type none?
to our none. Historically, the term was optional, although I think that term has problems and
we're sort of moving away from it because specifically one problem is that optional can
mean you don't have to pass it in, like I say, as a function parameter. Right. And that's not
the intention. Yeah. It has two total different meanings there. Interesting.
Let's talk a little bit about TypeShed.
I think TypeShed is pretty interesting.
Maybe people don't know too much about it.
So I'm sure you all are familiar with this project,
that you can basically add type information
that the libraries didn't bother to include for you, right?
What are thoughts on TypeShed?
How much do you all lean on this to round out
missing types?
I mean, there are two parts of types shed, right?
There's the standard library type stubs, which I think are invaluable, like all the type
checkers use those.
And I mean, will the standard library itself ever have inline types?
Who knows, this might be around forever.
Then there are also the third party stubs.
And I think that's what you're describing.
Their libraries that for whatever reason
don't ship with stubs themselves.
Those are in TypeShed.
And it's been like, for a while,
this has been a question of like what we want to do
with like TypeShed third party stubs, right?
'Cause like, ideally like libraries would ship
with their own types,
but there are various obstacles to that.
- You know, the obstacles that I know of used to be like,
we want this to run on Python 2 and Python 3,
or we want it to run on Python 3.3 still.
But it's been a long time
since any non-type supporting version of Python
was a real, you know, a supported type of thing, right?
I mean, even 3.9 became deprecated.
So on one hand, I feel like they could be merged in,
but there's also a lot of other areas that are maybe we don't--
they're not common, right?
Like other libraries like--
I don't know.
Just pick some-- let's say Pyramid.
I don't think the Pyramid Web Framework really ever got types added to it.
Somebody could go and create a type shed stub or
a types_pyramid you could pip install and then we'll add the types, right?
I certainly see it being really valuable for third party things that are just not
going to get the type attention they need.
Yellow, what do you think?
- Yeah, I think TypeShed is great.
I've spent a lot of time on improving it.
As Rebecca said, especially with a standard library,
it's irreplaceable.
For third party libraries,
I think it's become less needed over time.
It used to be that very few third party libraries
had any types.
Now that's obviously changed.
A lot of libraries ship their own types.
But still, there are quite a few types of libraries left
where there aren't inline types and TypeShit can provide useful types.
I think TypeShit also provides a service because it has a really great framework for testing these types.
We have tools like step test and various type checkers that help to make sure these types are good and meet a high standards.
So yeah, I think they're still useful for many libraries.
Yeah, I was just looking at the types-flask,
and I guess it must be gone
because now typeflask must have it internally.
So it's kind of an interim sort of thing.
That's pretty cool.
Yeah, in general, types has a policy
that we remove the steps from typeset
if they are in the library itself.
Yeah, yeah, very cool.
Okay, I find these super valuable
because if there's a library I want to work with
and it just doesn't have types for whatever reason,
You can install stuff from here, and all of a sudden,
your editor's way happier.
I mean, I know you all agreed on the API boundaries,
and I did as well.
It's like that's one of the really cool things.
The other thing that really makes me excited about types
is if I hit dot in my editor, I get
a meaningful list of real information
about what I'm working on.
And so adding these types of things
are pretty interesting.
I want to ask you all about these rogue tools
that do stuff with Python typing that maybe you all didn't intend.
Like we all mentioned Pydantic.
We've got Typer and FastAPI.
But even a little farther out there is BearType.
Are you familiar with BearType?
Yeah.
Yeah, BearType's interesting.
You can import-- they have fun.
They have fun with their import names and stuff.
But basically, you can put either a decorator
onto some sort of call site or something,
or you can just do it to an entire package--
or entire modules, rather.
So just from bear type dot claw, import bear type this.
and then it actually turns into runtime type checks.
Good idea, bad idea, interesting.
What do you all think?
So un-Pythonic, you won't even open the web page?
I think people should feel free to write whatever code helps
them make better software.
I haven't really used bar type much myself,
but clearly useful for some people.
And I think in general, in designing a type system,
We should try to accommodate all users who do useful things
for the type system.
And that includes things like Pydantic or BearType.
Yeah, it's pretty fast.
It's not as big of a hit as you would imagine.
Let me see.
What are they-- somewhere they had a really fun saying in here.
But here we go.
BearType brings Rust C++-inspired zero-cost abstractions
into the lawless world of dynamically typed Python
by enforcing type safety at the granular level of functions
and methods against type hints standardized
by the Python community.
And order one, non-amortize worst case time
with negligible constant factors.
Like how about that?
No, it's a pretty neat library and it's pretty fast.
Honestly, I've never used it in production.
Having type hints and squigglies in the editors
or in the linters has always been enough for me.
But I can see using this if it's really critical
and you're having issues, maybe you
want to catch some runtime errors.
I don't know.
It's not quite an endorsement, but it sure is like, huh,
that's different type of thing.
I definitely think that the extent to which type checkers
may have a different understanding of your code
from what happens at runtime.
and there isn't anything built in to catch that
is sometimes a pain point.
And so the desire to have your type annotations,
to find out at runtime if your type annotations
are telling you a lie,
it makes a lot of sense why people would like that.
I mean, it's something you get used to from other languages
where the type checker is built into the compiler.
- Right, right.
You get like a runtime typecast.
Like cannot, you know, we kind of get that
if you try to parse a thing, you know,
like put the int param around a string,
and it's not really a parsable as an int.
But for real type information, I think personally,
I would use this as like I might apply types,
type checking to a module for debugging and development
for a minute and just see what happens,
and then turn it back off.
I don't know that I'd just ship production code that way.
But anyway, I got a couple more questions.
We're getting shorter on time here.
What was one of the harder questions
that you all-- harder decisions you all
had to address on the council?
I think the most contentious one was PEP724,
if I remember the number correctly.
We've just around a feature called type guards,
which is around user-defined type narrowing functions.
We initially defined that in a way that later was found to be somewhat problematic,
and we basically came up with a better set of proposed semantics
that maybe we should have done the first time around.
And what this PEP proposed, and as you can see, I sponsored it,
is that we basically changed the meaning of the existing type cards
under certain conditions, which, yeah.
What is a type card?
A type card is a function, like there's a good example there, the isiterable.
It's a function that tells you how to narrow something.
So in this example, there's an isiterable type card,
which narrows an object to an iterable of anything.
And then inside defunc there, you can see if isiterable file,
it knows that it's an iterable.
And in this case, yeah, I guess it just narrows exactly to iterable any.
That's one of the ways that type cards works.
I see.
And the type that returns kind of communicates to the type system
like that this function ensures that the thing that came in
as an arbitrary object, in fact, is one of these.
Yeah.
Okay, interesting.
Yeah, so that was a tricky one, huh?
Yeah.
Any other standout, Rebecca or Carl?
Well, the current discussion around
what is the meaning of a float annotation?
Still unresolved contentious topic.
Okay, gotcha.
I mean, this on PEP724 is also what came to my mind immediately as well
because this was challenging discussion
because there were very conflicting considerations at play.
It's like what semantics did we want in the long term
and what did we want the type system to look like,
you know, say like 10 years from now
versus backwards compatibility
and what the migration story would look like.
It was quite tricky.
Yeah, I guess that's something
you will always have to be cognizant of
is like every change,
even if it's an improvement,
has to justify the fact that now you have challenges
with the version history over time.
I'm thinking like dict of string comma int with a capital or lowercase d.
I've got people, I did a YouTube video showing something with the lowercase version
because I was using something super modern like Python 3.11.
And I got a message like, hey, Michael, you don't know how to write Python.
Your code is broken.
This code that you wrote just doesn't even run.
I don't know how this is.
I'm like, what version of Python is in?
3.8.
Nope, you can't use 3A for that.
You're going to need to get a newer one.
You know what I mean?
But those are complexities that get added to Python
because of that.
Now you've got two ways to specify what a dict is.
There's a preferred new way, but there's still the old way.
And it just sort of piles up.
And it's very hard to ever actually get rid of the old way,
even if there's no good reason to use it anymore.
Exactly.
Once it's there, it's written in ink pretty much, right?
Like we have five or six different ways to format strings.
maybe with t-strings at six now.
They're all gonna still be there, right?
So every change, every decision you make
is not just a matter of, is it the right decision, right?
It's the, is it worth it, I'm sure.
Yeah, I don't know, how do you all balance that?
Like, that's tricky.
With things like the big change, at least we know we're moving towards better states.
And there's two things, but they mean exactly the same thing.
So the confusion is not as bad.
The problem with type card is that we're going to change how some existing thing works, like
what it meant.
And I think there are good reasons that maybe that was the right thing to do.
But it would also have been pretty confusing for people if their existing types suddenly
started meaning something completely different yeah absolutely hence float okay all right let's
let's uh do what's coming next like 315 316 do you all have things that are in the works that
you think are going to come or debates that are brewing i think for 315 the there's a type dict
feature coming, extra items. You can already use it in typing extensions if you want to use it,
but it will be in CPython as of 2.15. It's likely we'll have a small thing I added called
disjoint basis, which is very technical, but helps type narrowing in some cases.
Yeah, I think those are the things that are likely to make it. We can only speculate about
but what else people can propose,
we're sort of bound by what people actually write up as peps.
We have to wait for people to write the peps
before we can approve them.
I think there's  PEP 747 for type form,
which I think we recommended its acceptance,
but I don't think the steering council accepted it yet,
or it hasn't been accepted formally.
I think that's right.
I think that's on their plate.
Yeah, so that's also pretty likely to make it into 3.15.
Okay.
So this is one example of a case that will be pretty useful to people working with type
annotations at runtime because it'll allow you to... It's sort of a meta thing where you can annotate,
have a type annotation that describes another type annotation.
So it's useful if you're writing code that works with type annotations.
Sure. Okay. Make the peidantics of the world very happy.
I am actually pretty excited about type form
because I feel like there's a gap
and we can express in the type system.
Yeah.
And we good.
And there are cases in the existing type system,
like for instance, the cast function
and some other cases where something takes any type
expression as an argument.
We actually don't have a good way to annotate that today.
And this will provide a nice way to express that.
Yeah.
OK, cool.
Let me pull up one thing really quick.
Quick shout out to Will McGuggan here.
He just released his Toad project, which is the new--
takes textual and rich and all that kind of stuff
and applies it to like, what if we had a better
cloud code type of experience, which is pretty interesting.
So the reason I bring this up is--
final question.
What about, do you all even worry about the role of like how types interact with AI and agentic coding tools?
I know that if you have some code that has types on it and you give it to an AI,
it's got a better chance of understanding what's happening than if you give it purely untyped code and say,
tell me about this, right?
It doesn't even know necessarily what's being passed to it.
But is that anything you'll think about
or what are your thoughts on this?
- Certainly think about it some.
I mean, I think overall my feeling is that
these coding agents seem to do better
the more kind of the tighter feedback loops
you can give them to work with.
And so typing is another useful source of feedback
where you can say add type annotations
and make sure the type checker passes and seems.
So it still seems pretty useful in that world.
Yeah, you can easily write rules that say,
when you are done on anything I've asked you to do,
always run ty or always run Pyrefly
and make sure that there's no new errors or at least--
ideally, zero errors, right?
But nothing has been introduced.
Yeah, pretty interesting.
Other folks?
Rebecca, Yella?
Yeah, I guess in general, I think
Typing will remain useful for AI.
We are probably rapidly moving to a world
where a large proportion of all code is written by AI.
And--
Not everybody likes that opinion.
Not everybody likes that.
I guess maybe my current line of work makes me
think that's more likely to happen.
Though, I mean, it's also--
you don't have to like the fact it's going to be night soon.
But it's going to be night--
you know what I mean?
I just think there's so much momentum on this,
at least in the next five years or something,
that it's going to be really--
it's a truth of how many people are writing code
regardless of whether individuals want to write code that way.
You know what I mean?
So I think it's a consideration.
Yeah.
Yeah, I forgot that you worked at OpenAI, so of course--
I should pull up a codex example or something, shouldn't I?
Yeah, codex is great.
Use it.
No, but I mean, do you have any further insight into the role of types and coding agents?
I know that's not exactly what you work on, right?
Yeah, it's not too much, really.
I think, as Carl said, types can also be helpful for AI to understand code better and to get a better feedback loop.
I feel like the better we make AI, the more it is like humans.
And if typing makes humans better at writing and understanding this code, they'll probably also make AI better at it.
Yeah, it's the locality of information.
You can read the function and know everything you need to know about what's going into it
without bouncing around and trying to understand blocks of code and like what might have been
created that's getting passed.
It's good for humans and also good for AI, right?
Rebecca?
I mean, I guess I don't have much need to, I'll say I am maybe a little more skeptical
than most of my coworkers about the quality of AI generated code.
But that means I think I am particularly gung-ho about,
you know, like get AI to use types, type checkers,
keep the guardrails there.
I think that'd be very important.
- Yeah, if it's gonna make a mistake,
don't let it at least like make the type system become
disconnected and not working.
Like it has to keep the types hanging together
as a minimum bar, right?
And you can easily set that up as an automation.
Yeah, interesting to think of it as guardrails rather than an accelerant.
But yeah, 100% it is.
All right, folks.
I think that's it for all the time that we have.
Thank you.
Thank you for being here.
Final thoughts before we go.
Carl, I'll let you go first.
Final thoughts for people out there interested in Python typing.
Yeah, well, first of all, thanks for having us on the podcast.
Really appreciate it.
And thoughts for people out there.
I guess if you have ideas of how Python typing could be improved, discuss.python.org is a good place to bring up ideas and discuss them with the typing community and see what positive changes we can make.
Awesome. Rebecca?
Yeah, first, thank you, Michael. This is a lot of fun.
Last thoughts. So, you know, like, look at the typing council and sometimes think, oh, you know, like the PEP has like governance in its name, but I wouldn't say we're really a governing body or anything.
It's like people who are using the type system, like users, they're the ones who come up with,
you know, like all the best ideas, propose them, discuss them.
And we're just here to sort of be like, hey, you know, like we have some background and
like how type checkers work and maybe some of the history and we can provide input.
But I just encourage people, if there's a change you want to see in the type system,
you know, like propose it yourself.
It's very friendly and open community.
Yeah, now people who have listened know a little bit more about how to do so.
Awesome.
Thanks.
Jale, final word.
Also, again, thank you for having me here.
It's been great talking to all of you.
I guess what I want to say is similar to what Karo and Rebecca just said.
If you want to say something changes to the type system, I'd really encourage you to sign
up for discuss.python.org, make a proposal, go through the process.
can be somewhat daunting perhaps, especially if you have to
read a pep, but it is doable. There are several recent typing
peps have just been community members who saw something they
wanted to improve, proposed a  PEP and saw it to completion. If
there's something you want to see in the type system, then you
can do it too. Okay, awesome. Well, thank you all for keeping
Python typing going strong. Really appreciate your time on
the show. See you later.
Bye.